# Menstrual Cycle Phase Prediction & Symptom Forecasting

## Overview
Despite the rise of period tracking apps like Flo and Stardust and the growing focus on women’s health in the health tech industry, research on AI/ML applications for addressing menstruation, PCOS, and endometriosis is still limited. The majority of period tracking apps use calendar-based methods to predict future cycles based on previous cycle lengths, but they disregard the nuances that come from physiological and lifestyle signals, such as skin temperature, heart rate, sleep, and stress. Similarly, while wearables collect physiological data, these systems have been built on male-dominant data that fail to account for the variability and cyclical nature of female biological systems. Accurate menstrual cycle tracking and prediction is significant since it not only informs reproductive health decisions and fertility planning, but it also improves an individual’s quality of life by enabling them to anticipate and circumvent adverse symptoms or major health risks. Existing research has made meaningful progress in menstrual cycle phase prediction using a variety of machine learning approaches and factors of interest, ranging from using Basal Body Temperature (BBT) with state-space models to using BBT, sleep heart rate, and time since start of menstruation with XGBoost models. However, most of this work uses a relatively limited set of physiological symptoms, and there does not appear to be much research into symptom prediction within each phase. This project aims to bridge this gap by using Bayesian Machine Learning and neural networks to leverage physiological and lifestyle data collected from wearables from the [mcPHASES Dataset](https://physionet.org/content/mcphases/1.0.0/) to detect an individual’s cycle phase from biometric signals and forecast symptom severity.  

## Key Components
### Bayesian Multinomial Logistic Regression for Cycle Phase Classification 
We aim to expand on existing research by building a Bayesian Multinomial Logistic Regression model to predict the menstrual cycle phase (Fertility/Ovulation, Follicular, Luteal, and Menstruation) based on a larger range of input features that encompass biometric signals, lifestyle, and hormone levels (LH and Estrogen). This model will consider physiological signals like heart rate and glucose levels, as well as sleep quality/duration, stress levels, and physical activity. 

### Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) for Symptom Forecasting 
To further our project into a valuable tool for individuals to use on a regular basis, we aim to build an MLP that will forecast whether an individual will experience common symptoms associated with menstruation. An MLP is appropriate for this use case since we can utilize the sigmoid activation function to output the likelihood of a symptom occurring while considering multiple biometric and hormonal inputs, and it can also be extended by using alternative activation functions to solve multi-class problems, such as predicting the severity of these symptoms. The symptoms that we will predict include appetite, headaches, cramps, sore breasts, fatigue, sleep issues, mood swings, stress, food cravings, indigestion, and bloating.

## Literature Review
Google Drive: [https://drive.google.com/file/d/16nvjvVuTdLwit6LI7ekbAzWlqb3P8sbM/view?usp=sharing ](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1be03RCNfOFz_mjY07947M-aF2ye-Nq3S/view?usp=sharing)

